---
layout: article
title: Grit
description: How can you find something that compels you to pursue it?
category: goal
tags: 
- self-mastery
comments: true
# other options
---

<style>.embed-container { position: relative; margin-bottom: 2rem; padding-bottom: 56.25%; height: 0; overflow: hidden; max-width: 100%; } .embed-container iframe, .embed-container object, .embed-container embed { position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%; }</style><div class='embed-container'><iframe src='https://www.youtube.com/embed/YMqgiXLjvRs' frameborder='0' allowfullscreen></iframe></div>

<p>In a 2014 interview (see above video), Jason Calacanis asked Paul Graham if he had experienced a change in "signaling" related to candidate selection over his years at Y Combinator. Perhaps, for instance, Paul had initially favored Y Combinator candidates with a product background over MBA types. Paul responded with the following...</p>

<blockquote>We used to have more faith in brains. It turns out, you can be surprisingly stupid if you're sufficiently determined. <citation>– Paul Graham</citation></blockquote>

<p>It's an interesting anecdote, but it's not that surprising. There's been quite a bit of empirical research about this subject published in recent years. Probably the most well known study is "<a href="https://www.sas.upenn.edu/~duckwort/images/Grit%20JPSP.pdf">Grit: Perseverance and Passion for Long-Term Goals,</a>" by Duckworth, A. et al.</p>

<p>The researchers found that "followthrough," what they termed "grit," was often a better predictor of achievement, in a range of domains, than an individual's IQ and SAT scores.</p>

<blockquote>Among more than 3,500 participants attending nine different colleges, follow-through was a better predictor than all other variables, including SAT scores and high school rank, of whether a student would achieve a leadership position in college. Followthrough was also the single best predictor of significant accomplishment in science, art, sports, communications, organization, or some other endeavor (Willingham, 1985, p. 213)
<citation>– Duckworth, A. et al.</citation>
</blockquote>

<p>But followthrough isn't something a person is born with. It's a learned way of thinking. It's a self-reinforcing habit that you can sharpen over time.</p>

<p>Think about the Black Mamba. Kobe developed a <a href="http://www.sbnation.com/nba/2013/3/6/4071142/kobe-bryant-las-vegas-workout-reddit">laser-focused, long-game approach</a> to basketball and constantly worked to strengthen that mindset. "There’s an infinite groove. Whether you make the shot or miss it is inconsequential <a href="#fn1">[1]</a>."</p>

<p>The same holds true in entrepreneurship. Like Kobe, startup founders develop focused, often obsessive, perspectives to achieve their goals.</p>

<p>When a Quora user asked, "<a href="https://www.quora.com/How-can-I-be-as-great-as-Bill-Gates-Steve-Jobs-Elon-Musk-or-Sir-Richard-Branson">How can I be as great as Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, Elon Musk or Sir Richard Branson?</a>" Justine Musk, the ex-wife of Elon Musk, offered this advice:</p>

<blockquote>
	Be obsessed.<br/><br/>
	Be obsessed.<br/><br/>
	Be obsessed.<br/><br/>
	If you're not obsessed, then stop what you're doing and find whatever does obsess you. It helps to have an ego, but you must be in service to something bigger if you are to inspire the people you need to help you  (and make no mistake, you will need them). That 'something bigger' prevents you from going off into the ether when people flock round you and tell you how fabulous you are when you aren't and how great your stuff is when it isn't. Don't pursue something because you "want to be great". Pursue something because it fascinates you, because the pursuit itself engages and compels you. Extreme people combine brilliance and talent with an *insane* work ethic, so if the work itself doesn't drive you, you will burn out or fall by the wayside or your extreme competitors will crush you and make you cry.<br/><br/>
	Follow your obsessions until a problem starts to emerge, a big meaty challenging problem that impacts as many people as possible, that you feel hellbent to solve or die trying. It might take years to find that problem, because you have to explore different bodies of knowledge, collect the dots and then connect and complete them. 
	<citation>- Justine Musk</citation>
</blockquote>

<p>Although Justine's feedback sounds great, it's still a bit high-level. It's a bit vague. How can you find something that compels you to pursue it, as she recommends?</p> 

<p>Time to come full-circle. Back to Paul Graham. He actually offered some good advice about how to discover your loves, your obsessions, in an old, 2006 blog post – "<a href="http://www.paulgraham.com/love.html">How To Do What You Love.</a>"</p>

<blockquote>
	Another test you can use is: always produce. For example, if you have a day job you don't take seriously because you plan to be a novelist, are you producing? Are you writing pages of fiction, however bad? As long as you're producing, you'll know you're not merely using the hazy vision of the grand novel you plan to write one day as an opiate. The view of it will be obstructed by the all too palpably flawed one you're actually writing.<br/><br/>
	"Always produce" is also a heuristic for finding the work you love. If you subject yourself to that constraint, it will automatically push you away from things you think you're supposed to work on, toward things you actually like. "Always produce" will discover your life's work the way water, with the aid of gravity, finds the hole in your roof.
	<citation>– Paul Graham</citation>
</blockquote>

<hr>
<ul class="footnotes">
	<li>
		<strong>Footnotes</strong>
	</li>
	<li id="fn1">
		[1] Davis, Scott. "<a href="http://www.businessinsider.com/kobe-bryant-philosophy-about-failing-2014-11">Kobe Bryant Has A Great Philosophy On Failure</a>." <em>Business Insider</em>. 2014. 
	</li>
</ul>